
                              JP Software

                          4MAKE Documentation

                     Version 6.02 -- April 12, 1999


Copyright 1997-1999, JP Software Inc., All Rights Reserved.  Published
by JP Software Inc., P.O. Box 1470, E. Arlington, MA 02474, U.S.A.,
phone 781-646-3975, fax 781-646-0904.

This file explains how to use the 4DOS help file compiler, 4MAKE.

4MAKE and the 4DOS help text source file, 4DOS.TXT, are available to
registered users of 4DOS, but may not be distributed to others.  See the
file UTILREAD.TXT on your Help Text Disk for more information on your
license to use 4MAKE and 4DOS.TXT.

We make 4MAKE and 4DOS.TXT available to 4DOS users to allow you to
modify the help text for your own non-commercial purposes as specified
in the license agreement.  If you find the 4DOS help system useful and
want to make use of its capabilities in your own work, contact us for
information on licensing the 4DOS HELP engine.

If you program in Pascal you may want to consider purchasing the Turbo
Professional or Object Professional toolkit for Turbo Pascal.  4DOS's
4HELP.EXE is based on a modified version of Turbo Professional's TPHELP,
and 4MAKE is a modified version of MAKEHELP.  Turbo Professional and
Object Professional are available from TurboPower Software, P.O. Box
49009, Colorado Springs, C0 80949-9009, 800-333-4160.  They include an
enormous variety of tools for Turbo Pascal programmers (similar toolkits
are also available for C programmers), and we recommend them highly.


Introduction
------------

   The 4DOS HELP file 4DOS.HLP is compiled, meaning that the original
   ASCII text from the file 4DOS.TXT is processed and compressed to
   create 4DOS.HLP.  (If you had a previous version of 4MAKE, please
   note that these file names have changed slightly from older
   versions.)  4MAKE is the compiler which performs the processing and
   compression operations.

   In order to modify the help text using this system, you must perform
   the following steps:

      1) Copy 4DOS.TXT and 4MAKE.EXE to the directory or disk you will
      be using to make the modifications.

      2) Use an editor to modify 4DOS.TXT.  Because 4DOS.TXT contains a
      variety of special characters, including a complete table of all
      ASCII characters, your editor must be able to handle the full
      ASCII character set (characters 1 - 254).  We use the programmer's
      editor Brief to edit 4DOS.TXT, and many other ASCII file editors
      will work equally well.

      3) Run 4MAKE to create a new 4DOS.HLP file.  4MAKE has no command
      line parameters, and should simply be run via the command "4MAKE",
      from the directory containing the modified 4DOS.TXT file.

      4) Install the new 4DOS.HLP in your 4DOS directory for use with
      the copy of 4HELP.EXE that came with 4DOS.

      5) Repeat steps 2 through 4 as necessary to correct any errors in
      the new help file.


Help File Format
----------------

   The remainder of this documentation will explain the format of the
   4DOS.TXT file.  You will probably need to refer to the existing
   4DOS.TXT file as an example in order to understand the explanations
   below.

   The help text file contains three kinds of information:  the text
   itself, special characters embedded within the text to control
   display attributes and cross-referencing, and control directives.

   The help text simply consists of the text you wish to see on the
   screen.  The text is displayed at the width specified by the !WIDTH
   directive.  Lines which begin at the left margin are word-wrapped
   automatically; lines which are indented are not word-wrapped.  There
   is a limit of 2000 lines of text per help topic.


Special Characters
------------------

   You can embed special characters within the text to control display
   attributes and cross referencing.  When reading the information
   below, please note that characters listed as "^x" mean the single
   ASCII character ctrl-x.  For example, ^A means ctrl-A, which displays
   on the screen as a "smiling face".  In order to enter these
   characters you must use an editor which allows the entry of control
   characters into the text.  Many editors will allow such characters
   through entries made on the numeric keypad; for example to enter the
   ^A character, which has the value 01, you would hold down the Alt
   key, type a "1" on the numeric keypad, and release the Alt key.  If
   you have trouble entering control characters consult your editor
   documentation.

   The special characters you can embed in the text are:

      ^A (01, smiling face), ^B (02, reverse smiling face), ^C (03,
      heart):  Change the color of the displayed text.

           These characters change the color of the displayed text to
           one of the three possible special colors.  These are referred
           to as the "headings", "options", and "warnings" colors when
           using HELPCFG.EXE.  The text is displayed in the specified
           color until the character is encountered a second time, when
           the display reverts to the previous color.  Color changes can
           be nested up to six levels deep.

      ^D (04, diamond), ^E (05, club):  Specify a cross-reference.

           These characters are used to enclose both the text that
           refers to a topic elsewhere in the file, and the number of
           that topic.  The format is:

                 ^Dnnnn^Etext^E

           where "nnnn" is the (decimal) topic number for the cross-
           reference, and "text" is the text which should be displayed
           for the cross-reference.  For example, to cross-reference the
           word "MOUSE" to topic 103, use the sequence:

                 ^D103^EMOUSE^E

           When the help display is on the screen each cross-reference
           item is displayed in the "unselected cross-reference" color
           specified in HELPCFG.  In addition one item is displayed in
           the "selected cross-reference" color.  If the user types a
           carriage return the display switches to the topic number
           specified in the selected item; the horizontal and vertical
           arrow keys can be used to change which cross-reference item
           is selected.

           A cross-reference item can span a line break if you wish.

      ^F (06, spade):  Used internally by the !INDENT directive.

           Do NOT use this character in your text, or your display will
           not work.  Use a ^X escape character (see below) before any
           literal ^F you want embedded in the help text.

      ^H (08, reverse dot):  Enter an ASCII character in numeric form.

           This character allows you to enter any character into the
           text, including characters that normally have other meanings
           such as the EOF character (^Z), or one of the embedded
           characters described here.  For example, to enter a ^Z (ASCII
           value 26) in the text use:

                 ^H26^H

           This character will appear as a right-pointing arrow when the
           help text is displayed on screen.

      ^X (24, up-arrow):  Suppress the normal meaning of the following
      character.

           ^X allows you to insert characters in the text that would
           otherwise have special meaning to 4MAKE or 4HELP.EXE.  The
           characters that need to be entered in this way include ^X
           itself, all of the other special characters listed above, and
           LF (10), VT (11), FF (12), CR (13), SO (14), and SI (15).
           Characters entered between ^Fs may be preceded with a ^X; in
           this case the ^X applies to the character entered between the
           ^Fs, and not to the first ^F. For example,

                 ^X^F10^F

           enters the character with ASCII value 10 (LF) into the help
           text, and suppresses its normal end-of-line meaning, causing
           the character to be displayed as a graphic symbol (it appears
           as a reverse-video circle).  For further examples of the use
           of ^X, see the ASCII table in 4DOS.TXT.


Control Directives
------------------

   Control directives begin with an exclamation point in column 1.  They
   are used to control text formatting and topic indexing.  In the list
   below items shown in brackets are optional.  The control directives
   are:

      !WIDTH width

           !WIDTH sets the display width.  This width includes the
           border on each side of the screen and a space on the inside
           of the border, so the actual text area will be (width - 4)
           columns.  Text will be word-wrapped at this width unless the
           !LINE directive is used.  The !WIDTH directive must appear
           first in the help file.

      !FIRST number

           !FIRST assigns the help topic that will be displayed when
           help is first called.  If this directive is not set, or if
           the topic number is zero, the index will be displayed
           initially.

           If used, this directive must appear before the first !TOPIC
           directive.

      !EXTERNAL name

           !EXTERNAL assigns the name of the program that will be called
           to display external DOS help when the <F4> key is pressed
           from the help screen.

           This directive must appear before the first !TOPIC directive.

      !KEYS number

           !KEYS allows you to assign the help topic that will be called
           to display a list of the help keys when the <F3> key is
           pressed from the help screen.

           This directive must appear before the first !TOPIC directive.

      !TOPIC number [=number] [name]

           !TOPIC must be located at the beginning of each help topic.
           All the other directives below are used within the help text
           for each topic.

           Each topic must be assigned a unique topic number.  These
           numbers must be greater than zero, and are normally assigned
           in ascending numerical order.  Gaps of any significant size
           in the numbering sequence should be avoided as they will
           unnecessarily increase the size of the help file.

           The name given is used at the top of the help text display,
           and in the index if the topic is indexed.  It may contain
           spaces, punctuation, etc.  The total space for topic names is
           determined by multiplying the length of the longest name used
           by the number of topics in the file, and may not exceed
           65,536 characters.

           Duplicate topic names are allowed (though in most cases only
           one topic with the same name should be part of the index).
           If you access the help system with a HELP [topicname]
           command, and the name is a duplicate, the first entry in the
           help text will be the one found.  To override this, use a ^X
           escape character as the first character in the topic name.
           This character will be used in name matching, preventing the
           topics on which it is used from matching the search, but it
           will not be displayed.  For an example, see the Alias .INI
           directive and the ALIAS command in the 4DOS.TXT file.  The ^X
           is used on the .INI directive's !TOPIC line, so that HELP
           ALIAS will bring up help for the command instead.  (If the
           ALIAS command were in the file before the Alias directive,
           this would not be necessary.)

           To equate a topic to another topic in the help file include
           an =NN after the topic number, where NN is the topic
           containing the information ("target topic").  There must be a
           space after the topic number and before the =NN.  No
           information should be entered for an equated topic other than
           the !TOPIC directive.  The equated topic will appear in the
           index and its name will appear at the top of the display
           screen, but the text shown will be the text for the target
           topic.  4MAKE will display an error message if the target
           topic does not exist.  Equates can refer to a topic defined
           earlier or later in the help text file, but may not be
           nested.  For an example, see the ERASE command in 4DOS.TXT,
           which is equated to DEL.

           The help text for the topic begins on the first line after
           the !TOPIC directive that does not contain another directive.
           A topic continues until another !TOPIC directive is found or
           the end of the file is reached.

      !INDEX number

           !INDEX allows you to change the normal alphabetical order of
           help index entries.  It must appear on the line following the
           !TOPIC directive.  If no !INDEX directive is used the topic
           is assigned an index number of 7777 hex (30583 decimal).
           This results in the following sort order in the help index:

                 topics with an index number < 30583
                 topics with no specified index number
                 topics with an index number > 30583

           Within each group the topics are sorted in alphabetical order
           by topic name.  Do not use the value 65535 (FFFF hex) as an
           index value as it will disable indexing of the topic.

      !NOINDEX

           !NOINDEX excludes the specified topic from the help index.
           It must appear on the line following the !TOPIC directive.
           When !NOINDEX is used the topic will be accessible only
           through a cross-reference.  Most of the topics in the version
           5.51 4DOS.TXT file are !NOINDEX topics.

      !LINE

           !LINE forces a line break.  This disables automatic word wrap
           between the line before the directive and the line after it.
           Line breaks will be inserted automatically whenever a line is
           entirely blank, or begins with one or more spaces, so no
           !LINE directive is needed in these cases.

      !INDENT l s f r

           !INDENT indents the following block of text (until the next
           !INDENT directive).  It should be followed by four numbers:

                 l    Left indent in characters.  The following text
                      will be indented this many characters from the
                      left edge of the display window when it is
                      displayed.  Word wrapping takes the indent into
                      account.

                 s    Skip width in characters.  4MAKE skips the first s
                      characters when reading input lines.  This allows
                      you to indent lines in the help text for
                      readability, without disabling line wrap as
                      indented input text usually does.

                 f    First line indent in characters.  The first line
                      of each paragraph is indented this far from the
                      left edge of the display window.

                 r    Right indent in characters.  The following text
                      will be indented this many characters from the
                      right edge of the display window when it is
                      displayed.

           All values default to 0 at the start of the file.  To return
           all values to the default use !INDENT 0 (only a single "0" is
           needed).  The indent values are NOT reset to 0 at the start
           of a topic, so don't forget to use a !INDENT 0 to clear them!
           All indents are taken into account for word wrapping.

           For examples of how !INDENT is used see the options
           (switches) for any command.

      !TTY, !ENDTTY

           The !TTY directive controls which portions of a help topic
           appear when that topic is invoked from 4HELP.EXE with a /?
           command line switch (which tells 4HELP to send the topic text
           directly to the screen).  !TTY is used to signal the start
           and the end of a block of !TTY output -- it simply toggles
           whether a particular section of the text is output when /? is
           used.  !ENDTTY is equivalent to !TTY, and can be used at the
           end of a block to improve the readability of the text if you
           wish (the distributed help text does not use this method).
           Any number of !TTY and !ENDTTY marks may appear within a help
           topic; the only restriction is that each must appear on a
           line by itself.  These directives have no effect on a topic's
           appearance within the regular 4HELP display.  Most of the
           help topics in 4DOS.TXT have !TTY markers in them.

      !TTYONLY

           In some cases, you may wish to have special help text that
           appears ONLY when text is sent directly to the screen with
           4HELP's /? option.  For this purpose, you may use !TTYONLY
           and append new text after the main body of help text.  All
           text following !TTYONLY (to the end of the topic) will appear
           only when 4HELP.EXE is invoked with the topic name and the /?
           switch.  It is important to remember that 4HELP's normal
           full-screen help display treats !TTYONLY the same as a topic
           end, and will not display anything following !TTYONLY.


Error Messages
--------------

   4MAKE reports a number of possible errors.  The error messages and
   their meanings are:

      Disk I/O problems:  A disk I/O error has occurred.  Check that
      disk drive doors are closed and that there is sufficient space for
      the output file.

      Topic name array exceeds 64K:  Use shorter topic names or reduce
      the number of topics in the help file.

      Insufficient memory:  There isn't enough memory for 4MAKE's
      temporary storage.  Free some memory and run 4MAKE again.

      File index array exceeds 64K:  There are more than 10000 topics in
      the help index.  Reduce the number of topics.

      No help topics specified:  4MAKE couldn't find any !TOPIC
      directives in the input file.

      Invalid cross-reference topic number:  The number after the ^D in
      a cross-reference entry is invalid.

      Invalid width, Invalid item, Invalid index, Invalid topic, Invalid
      equated topic number, Invalid indent:  The number following a help
      directive is invalid.

      Duplicate help topic number:  The same topic number was assigned
      to more than one topic.  Help topic numbers must be unique.

      WIDTH statement must precede first topic:  The !WIDTH directive
      must be the first item in the help file.

      INDEX statement must follow TOPIC statement:  The !INDEX directive
      must immediately follow the !TOPIC directive.

      Text in skip area:  The last !INDENT directive specified a skip
      width but 4MAKE found text in the skip area (the first "s"
      characters of the line).  Generally this indicates mistaken
      indentation in the text, or an error in the !INDENT directive.
      This is a warning and will not stop help file compilation.

      Unrecognized directive:  The first column of a line contains an
      exclamation point but the text that follows is not a valid
      directive.

      Invalid equate, target topic not defined:  You have attempted to
      equate one topic to another using "!TOPIC n1 =n2" but the target
      topic (n2) is not defined in the help file.

